# Attempting a 1.8 Playthrough of 1.21
**Can we still play the same game?**

*By Cooper Ott, June 14, 2024*

Minecraft. Nostalgic. Two-week phases. We've heard it all before. But can we still force that same old game out of the modern version?

I'll be documenting my playthrough here, in no sort of proper format until I actually write a post about it.

## Goals
Simple: to stay in-line with the vision of classic Minecraft:

- No beds
- No sprinting (I just totally unbound it)
- I won't kill sheep (a little extreme, but I'm not using them as a food source or to make beds, so I figured there's no point).
- I wont be using later combat mechanics (I'm going to use a sword without a shield)

Unfortunately, since I'm playing in vanilla, I'll still have to deal with hunger.

### Spawn
I spawned in a Savannah, playthrough over.

Jokes aside, I spawned a hundred blocks from a ruined portal, one that once the lava was drained only had a SINGLE out of place obsidian. I decided to not use buckets, and instead stick it out until I found diamond. I did pick up the gear, though I didn't equip it.

### The First Night: Classic Minecraft
This was actually some of the most fun I've had in Minecraft in a while. I was spelunking for a bit, when I got hit pretty bad by a baby zombie. I killed it and got back up to the surface, but it was night. **Walking** away from enemies is so much more stressful, and you have to actually use the environment to your advantage to get away. Eventually, I made it to day.

### Base One: I am a dwarf and I'm digging a hole
I ended up at some stony shores by the time night two rolled around, right off of a fairly dense forest. I was smelting outside and ended up getting swamped by five zombies, and I had to circle around them and tower up so I could get access to my furnaces.

**Note.** Why doesn't copper make tools, weapons, or armor? They should be a decent middle ground between stone tools and iron.

I ended up tunneling down a bit and set up a tiny in-ground base before tunneling down until I found a lush cave.

### Caves and Cliffs: It feels right at home
I came across the lush caves by random chance, and it felt so cool. It was actually super dangerous, and I died here for the first time (skeletons are tough). I ended up all the way back at spawn, and all of my gear despawned by the time I got back. I learned to be more careful here, and then died a couple more times. Eventually though, I lit up enough of an area where I wasn't getting caught in between three skeletons, and got to enjoy the new biome, and I got my hands on some iron that was exposed. A blue axolotl was a cool thing, and an abandoned Mineshaft cutting through around y0 eventually led to me getting my hands on 6 diamonds.

### Base Two: Electric Boogaloo
I headed back towards the nether portal ruins near spawn to fix the one block I needed, and moved all of my items back too. Surprisingly, a chest in a boat worked well here. I set up a tiny "dirt hut" with a bunch of basement storage, geared up (gold boots to avoid piglins), and went in.

### The Nether
I spawned in the "heart of the nether", what I call the nether waste biomes that have deep chasms running through them. After exploring and bridging everywhere, I eventually located a nether bridge. I built a save path/tunnel from it back to my portal, and then went in, looted two chests, and got blown up by a ghast. Most items fell into lava :(

**Note.** The new nether biomes are really cool, but they feel totally different to the original nether. Soul Sand Valley is a spooky wasteland dotted with skeleton snipers, a really risky place to travel through. Basalt deltas are just pure volcanic fun. The crimson forest also feels very nether-ish, these big fleshy trees and vines that look like hanging veins are setting appropriate, and it comes with the very dangerous hoglins who can replenish food supply. The Warped Forests, on the other hand, just feel super alien. Maybe it's just the endermen, but I feel like with slight tweaks it'd make a better End biome. **Overall** I'd say the Nether update certainly changed the nether for the better.

### The Nether Bridge (for real now)
I have a confession to make: I've never beaten the game solo before, and I actually really enjoyed having to figure out how to loot this thing! I ended up using a bunch of cobblestone slabs to make checkpoints in every hallway that I could crouch under, in case I had to retreat. Once you have a strategy, wither skeletons and blazes are a BREEZE. And that's what I really liked about this: using the mechanics of the game (not combat) to succeed, rather than some elaborate combat system.

## Reflection
Similar to the ReIndev mod, the Minecraft I (and a lot of others) have nostalgia for is on full of fun, fear, and discovery. A lot of the newer parts of Minecraft are good, and have improved the experience as to what is possible with the game. Some parts should be moved around, and some should be outright scrapped.

**Beds.** Need to be taken out of the game entirely, night is an intrinsic part of the game, and letting players skip is is crazy. Setting a new respawn point isn't too bad, but should definitely be a post-nether feature (wow, like the respawn anchor!).

**Sprinting.** It makes the game too easy, and danger is easily avoidable. Without it, you pay better attention to what's around you and actually rely on building things to block enemies and protect yourself. It's what the core of the game is about.

**Hunger.** Hunger is an extremely annoying mechanic that doesn't functionally improve the game. Since hunger ALWAYS drains, you ALWAYS need food, so you're encouraged as early as possible to create some sort of automation to get a stack of food in your inventory. Having food only be a preparation step for dangerous tasks is far more interesting, and it removes an annoying part of the casual part of game. Food should go back to directly healing you. GOOD food sources should take up full slots, snacks should stack up to 16. This means that snacks could be used to survive poison/wither effects, while meals would be good for recovering in combat. There's also the idea of providing potion effects when you eat certain types of foods: https://youtu.be/1xvNu32OaVk?si=6AJLIKvCW6RUYn0V&t=1331

**Copper Tools/Weapons/Armor.** It's natural to have these, given that copper is in the game. Copper is very common (and presumably lighter than stone) so maybe this can be an early/mid game set that might not provide a durability improvement, but the tools could be faster than stone.

**Wandering Traders, and Villagers.** Wandering traders are just a nuisance in the modern game. For how rare of an encounter they are, they need to offer cool and unique trades, and **not** in the sense of overpowered weapons and armor. They should be set to spawn within a certain radius of a player, if certain "settlement" goals are met, and can possibly "set up shop" provided that a player trades with them. Think the Terraria npc system, except that traders can leave/despawn if they don't get business. Each trade might increase trade quality like villagers' profession levels. Think of this as a replacement for naturally occurring villages, as you set up your own in the world.

**Enchanting.** I got an enchanted book, and thought it was super awesome! For a couple seconds, because then I thought that it wasn't even something I'd try to get if I was enchanting with a table. Enchantments need to be powerful and RARE, found only through looting abandoned mine shaft chests or the like.

**The End.** This video says it all: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P01M-BKOxzM. The End should be a cool extension to the world, not just a void filled with loot. Taking the Warped Forest out of the nether (and replacing it with Mushroom Fields) and putting it in the end can bring much needed life and *purpose* to the End. It can still be an alien void heaven, but 

## World "Lore"
The original Minecraft did not have much of a story, but as new features have been added one has emerged.

[Game Theory's COMPLETE Lore video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysQ-dMA_qkk) (written version [here](/blog/preview/Game-Theory-Minecraft.md)) lays out an extremely competent theory about modern Minecraft's world story, which we can use as a sort of base for what our classic-friendly version could be. To enact changes to the game, we need to enact changes to this story as well.

### Village and Pillage
Villages and villagers work against player creativity and the motivation to build your own creative structures that suit your needs. For these reasons, villages should be **dangerous, abandoned, and/or very rare**.

Large groups of villagers would naturally draw attention from zombies, and wooden houses and crops that get trampled every night wouldn't stand up to constant assault. This is why the only forms of "villagers" that should remain in the game are pillagers (combat-focused with defensible towers that mobs can't climb) and wandering traders (nomads with invisibility potions to survive).


# Misc
https://www.reddit.com/r/Minecraft/comments/iev0zs/theory_where_crying_obsidian_comes_from/?rdt=50416

Better systems proposal: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xvNu32OaVk

Reindev: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ceqPN0Ie_c and https://reindev.miraheze.org/wiki/Reindev_Wiki